<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<dl>
				<dt id="aba" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">abá</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Tagalog exclamation of wonder, surprise, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, often used to introduce or emphasize a contradictory statement.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="alcalde" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>alcalde</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Governor of a province or district, with both executive and judicial authority.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="ayuntamiento" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Ayuntamiento</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A city corporation or council, and by extension the building in which it has its offices; specifically, in Manila, the capitol.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="balete" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">balete</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine banyan, a tree sacred in Malay folklore.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="banka" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">banka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A dugout canoe with bamboo supports or outriggers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="batalan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">batalan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The platform of split bamboo attached to a <i xml:lang="tl">nipa</i> house.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="batikulin" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">batikulin</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A variety of easily-turned wood, used in carving.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="bibinka" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">bibinka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A sweetmeat made of sugar or molasses and rice-flour, commonly sold in the small shops.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="buyera" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">buyera</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A woman who prepares and sells the <i xml:lang="tl">buyo</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="buyo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">buyo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The masticatory prepared by wrapping a piece of areca-nut with a little shell-lime in a betel-leaf⁠—the pan of British India.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cabesang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">cabesang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Title of a <i xml:lang="es">cabeza de barangay</i>; given by courtesy to his wife also.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cabeza-de-barangay" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cabeza de barangay</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Headman and tax-collector for a group of about fifty families, for whose “tribute” he was personally responsible.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="calesa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">calesa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A two-wheeled chaise with folding top.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="calle" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">calle</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Street (Spanish).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="camisa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">camisa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>1. A loose, collarless shirt of transparent material worn by men outside the trousers. 2. A thin, transparent waist with flowing sleeves, worn by women.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="capitan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>capitan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Captain,” a title used in addressing or referring to a <i xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</i>, or a former occupant of that office.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="carambas" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">carambas</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Spanish exclamation denoting surprise or displeasure.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="carbineer" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>carbineer</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Internal-revenue guard.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="carromata" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">carromata</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A small two-wheeled vehicle with a fixed top.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="casco" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">casco</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A flat-bottomed freight barge.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cayman" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>cayman</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine crocodile.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cedula" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cedula</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Certificate of registration and receipt for poll-tax.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="chongka" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">chongka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A child’s game played with pebbles or cowry-shells.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cigarrera" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cigarrera</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A woman working in a cigar or cigarette factory.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="civil-guard" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Civil Guard</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Internal quasi-military police force of Spanish officers and native soldiers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cochero" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cochero</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Carriage driver, coachman.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cuarto" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cuarto</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A copper coin, one hundred and sixty of which were equal in value to a silver peso.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="filibuster" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>filibuster</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A native of the Philippines who was accused of advocating their separation from Spain.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="filibusterism" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>filibusterism</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>See <em>filibuster</em>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="gobernadorcillo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Petty governor,” the principal municipal official⁠—also, in Manila, the head of a commercial guild.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="gumamela" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">gumamela</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The hibiscus, common as a garden shrub in the Philippines.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="indian" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Indian</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Spanish designation for the Christianized Malay of the Philippines was <i xml:lang="es">indio</i> (Indian), a term used rather contemptuously, the name <em>Filipino</em> being generally applied in a restricted sense to the children of Spaniards born in the Islands.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kalan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kalan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The small, portable, open, clay fireplace commonly used in cooking.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kalikut" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kalikut</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A short section of bamboo for preparing the <i xml:lang="es">buyo</i>; a primitive betel-box.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kamagon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kamagon</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A tree of the ebony family, from which fine cabinet-wood is obtained. Its fruit is the <i xml:lang="es">mabolo</i>, or date-plum.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="lanete" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">lanete</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A variety of timber used in carving.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="linintikan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">linintikan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Tagalog exclamation of disgust or contempt⁠—“thunder!”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="malacanang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">Malacañang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The palace of the Captain-General: from the vernacular name of the place where it stands, “fishermen’s resort.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="malecon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Malecon</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A drive along the bay shore of Manila, opposite the Walled City.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="mestizo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Mestizo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A person of mixed Filipino and Spanish blood; sometimes applied also to a person of mixed Filipino and Chinese blood.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="naku" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">nakú</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Tagalog exclamation of surprise, wonder, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="narra" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>narra</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p xml:lang="tl">The Philippine mahogany.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="nipa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">nipa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Swamp palm, with the imbricated leaves of which the roofs and sides of the common native houses are constructed.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="novena" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>novena</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A devotion consisting of prayers recited for nine consecutive days, asking for some special favor; also, a booklet of these prayers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="panguingui" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">panguingui</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A complicated card-game, generally for small stakes, played with a monte deck.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="panguinguera" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">panguinguera</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A woman addicted to <i xml:lang="tl">panguingui</i>, this being chiefly a feminine diversion in the Philippines.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pansit" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">pansit</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A soup made of Chinese vermicelli.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pansiteria" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">pansitería</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A shop where <i xml:lang="tl">pansit</i> is prepared and sold.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="panuelo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">pañuelo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A starched neckerchief folded stiffly over the shoulders, fastened in front and falling in a point behind: the most distinctive portion of the customary dress of Filipino women.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="peso" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>peso</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A silver coin, either the Spanish peso or the Mexican dollar, about the size of an American dollar and of approximately half its value.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="petate" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">petate</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Sleeping-mat woven from palm leaves.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pina" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">piña</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Fine cloth made from pineapple-leaf fibers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="provincial" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Provincial</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The head of a religious order in the Philippines.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="punales" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">puñales</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Daggers!”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="querida" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">querida</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A paramour, mistress: from the Spanish “beloved.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="real" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>real</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>One-eighth of a peso, twenty <i xml:lang="es">cuartos</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sala" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">sala</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The principal room in the more pretentious Philippine houses.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="salakot" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">salakot</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Wide hat of palm or bamboo, distinctively Filipino.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sampaguita" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sampaguita</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Arabian jasmine: a small, white, very fragrant flower, extensively cultivated, and worn in chaplets and rosaries by women and girls⁠—the typical Philippine flower.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sipa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sipa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A game played with a hollow ball of plaited bamboo or rattan, by boys standing in a circle, who by kicking it with their heels endeavor to keep it from striking the ground.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="soltada" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">soltada</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A bout between fighting-cocks.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="susmariosep" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">’Susmariosep</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A common exclamation: contraction of the Spanish, <i xml:lang="es">Jesús, María, y José</i>, the Holy Family.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tabi" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tabí</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The cry used by carriage drivers to warn pedestrians.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tabu" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tabú</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A utensil fashioned from half of a coconut shell.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="taju" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tajú</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A thick beverage prepared from bean-meal and syrup.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tampipi" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tampipi</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A telescopic basket of woven palm, bamboo, or rattan.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tandang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">Tandang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A title of respect for an old man: from the Tagalog term for “old.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tapis" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>tapis</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A piece of dark cloth or lace, often richly worked or embroidered, worn at the waist somewhat in the fashion of an apron; a distinctive portion of the native women’s attire, especially among the Tagalogs.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tatakut" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tatakut</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Tagalog term for “fear.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="teniente-mayor" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">teniente-mayor</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Senior lieutenant,” the senior member of the town council and substitute for the <i xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tertiary-sister" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>tertiary sister</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A member of a lay society affiliated with a regular monastic order.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tienda" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">tienda</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A shop or stall for the sale of merchandise.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tikbalang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tikbalang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An evil spirit, capable of assuming various forms, but said to appear usually as a tall black man with disproportionately long legs: the “bogey man” of Tagalog children.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tulisan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tulisan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Outlaw, bandit. Under the old regime in the Philippines the <i xml:lang="tl">tulisanes</i> were those who, on account of real or fancied grievances against the authorities, or from fear of punishment for crime, or from an instinctive desire to return to primitive simplicity, foreswore life in the towns “under the bell,” and made their homes in the mountains or other remote places. Gathered in small bands with such arms as they could secure, they sustained themselves by highway robbery and the levying of blackmail from the country folk.</p>
				</dd>
			</dl>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
